README.md, before:

Universum
=========

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/serokell/universum.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/serokell/universum)
[![Windows build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/serokell/universum?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/ChShersh/universum)
[![Hackage](https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/universum.svg)](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/universum)
[![Stackage LTS](http://stackage.org/package/universum/badge/lts)](http://stackage.org/lts/package/universum)
[![Stackage Nightly](http://stackage.org/package/universum/badge/nightly)](http://stackage.org/nightly/package/universum)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

`universum` is a custom prelude used in @Serokell that has:

1. **Excellent documentation**: tutorial, migration guide from `Prelude`,
   Haddock with examples for (almost) every function,
   all examples are tested with [`doctest`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/doctest).
2. `universum`-specific [HLint](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hlint) rules:
   [`.hlint.yaml`](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/master/.hlint.yaml)
3. Focus on safety, convenience and efficiency.

What is this file about?
------------------------

This README contains introduction to `Universum` and a tutorial on how to use it.

Structure of this tutorial
--------------------------

This tutorial has several parts:

1. [Philosophy and motivation.](#why-another-custom-prelude-)
2. [How to use `universum`.](#how-to-use-universum-)
3. [Changes in `Prelude` (some gotchas).](#gotchas-)
4. [Already known things that weren't in `Prelude` brought into scope.](#things-that-you-were-already-using-but-now-you-dont-have-to-import-them-explicitly-)
5. [New things added.](#whats-new-)
6. [Migration guide from `Prelude`.](#migration-guide-from-prelude-)

This is not a tutorial on _Haskell_, and not even a tutorial on each function. For the detailed
documentation of every function with examples and usages see
[_Haddock documentation_](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/universum).

Why another custom Prelude? [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
---------------------------

### Motivation

In [Serokell](https://github.com/serokell/),  we want to be as much productive as possible.
That's why we are using [_Haskell_](https://haskell-lang.org/). This choice of language implies
that we're restricted to use [`Prelude`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.9.1.0/docs/Prelude.html):
implicit import of basic functions, type classes and data types. But the default `Prelude`
[is considered to be not so good](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=8002749)
due to some historical reasons.

This is why we decided to use a better tool. Hopefully _Haskell_ provides us with ability
to replace default `Prelude` with some alternative. All we need to do is to implement
new basic set of defaults. But we don't intend to implement everything from scratch.
There're already plenty of [preludes](https://guide.aelve.com/haskell/alternative-preludes-zr69k1hc).
After some hot long discussions our team decided to base our custom prelude on
[`protolude`](https://github.com/sdiehl/protolude). If you're not familiar with it,
you can read [a tutorial about `protolude`](http://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/protolude.html).

The next section explains why we have made this choice and what we are willing to do.
This tutorial doesn't cover the differences from `protolude`. Instead, it explains how Universum is different from custom `Prelude`.

### Main goals

While creating and maintaining a custom prelude, we are pursuing the following goals:

1. Avoid all [partial functions](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/5n51u3/why_are_partial_functions_as_in_head_tail_bad/).
   We like [total](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/TotalFunction.html) and exception-free functions.
   Though you can still use some unsafe functions from `Universum.Unsafe` module
   but they are not exported by default.
2. Use more efficient [string representations](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/29jw0s/whats_wrong_with_string/).
   `String` type is crushingly inefficient. All our functions either try to be polymorphic over string
   types, or use [`Text`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/text-1.2.2.1/docs/Data-Text.html)
   as the default string type. `String` type alias is still reexported, because the community
   is evolving slowly, some libraries still use `String` type. But we recommend to avoid `String`!
3. Don't reinvent the wheel. We're not trying to rebuild whole type hierarchy from scratch,
   as it's done in [`classy-prelude`](https://github.com/snoyberg/mono-traversable).
   Instead, we reexport common and well-known things from `base` and some other
   libraries used in everyday production programming in _Haskell_.
   > **Note**: well, we did end up inventing something new.
4. Export more useful and commonly used functions. [Hello, my name is Dmitry. I was
   coding _Haskell_ for 3 years but still hoogling which module `liftIO` comes from.](https://twitter.com/magnars/status/834683466130345984)
   Things like `liftIO`, `ReaderT` type, `MVar`-related functions have unambiguous names,
   are used in almost every non-trivial project, and it's really tedious to import them
   manually every time.

Unlike `protolude`, we are:

1. Not trying to be as general as possible (thus we don't export much from
   [`GHC.Generics`](https://github.com/sdiehl/protolude/blob/41710698eedc66fb0bfc5623d3c3a672421fbab5/src/Protolude.hs#L365)).
2. Not trying to maintain every version of `ghc` compiler (only the
   [latest 3](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/b6353285859e9ed3544bddbf55d70237330ad64a/.travis.yml#L15)
3. Trying to make writing production code easier (see
   [enhancements and fixes](https://github.com/serokell/universum/issues)).

How to use Universum [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
--------------------

Okay, enough philosophy. If you want to just start using `universum` and
explore it with the help of compiler, set everything up according to the instructions below.

Disable the built-in prelude at the top of your file:

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude #-}
```

Or directly in your project `.cabal` file, if you want to use in every module by default:

```haskell
default-extensions: NoImplicitPrelude
```

Then add the following import to your modules:

```haskell
import Universum
```

If you're using [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/), you can
[modify your configs](https://github.com/serokell/universum/issues/8#issuecomment-276444879)
a little bit if you don't want to type `import Universum` manually every time.


Gotchas [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
-------

* `head`, `tail`, `last`, `init` work with `NonEmpty a` instead of `[a]`.
* Safe analogue for `head` function: `safeHead :: [a] -> Maybe a`.
* `undefined` triggers a compiler warning, which is probably not what you want. Either use `throwIO`, `Except`, `error` or `bug`.
* `map` is `fmap` now.
* Multiple sorting functions are available without imports:
  + `sortBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering) -> [a] -> [a]`: sorts list using given custom comparator.
  + `sortWith :: Ord b => (a -> b) -> [a] -> [a]`: sorts a list based on some property of its elements.
  + `sortOn :: Ord b => (a -> b) -> [a] -> [a]`: just like `sortWith`, but more time-efficient if function is calculated slowly (though less space-efficient). So you should write `sortOn length` (would sort elements by length) but `sortWith fst` (would sort list of pairs by first element).
* Functions `sum` and `product` are strict now, which makes them more efficient.
* If you try to do something like `putStrLn "hi"`, you'll get an error message if
  `OverloadedStrings` is enabled – it happens because the compiler doesn't know what
  type to infer for the string. Use `putTextLn` in this case.
* Since `show` doesn't come from `Show` anymore, you can't write `Show` instances easily.
  Either use autoderived instances or
  [`Buildable`](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/f2ccf8afd862e37ccd204c0ef9efde48a05c2d29/src/Universum.hs#L144).
* You can't call some `Foldable` methods over `Maybe` and some other types.
  `Foldable` generalization is useful but
  [potentially error-prone](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/60r9hu/proposal_suggest_explicit_type_application_for/).
  Instead we created our own fully compatible with `Foldable`
  [`Container` type class](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/b6353285859e9ed3544bddbf55d70237330ad64a/src/Universum/Container/Class.hs#L180)
  but that restricts the usage of functions like `length` over `Maybe`, `Either`, `Identity` and tuples.
  We're also using _GHC 8_ feature of
  [custom compile-time errors](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#custom-compile-time-errors)
  to produce
  [more helpful messages](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/54a742c10720f11c739f2d268365d723924b83a9/src/Containers.hs#L474).
* As a consequence of previous point, some functions like `traverse_`, `forM_`, `sequenceA_`, etc.
  are generalized over `Container` type classes.
* `error` takes `Text`.


Things that you were already using, but now you don't have to import them explicitly [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Commonly used libraries

First of all, we reexport some generally useful modules: `Control.Applicative`,
`Data.Traversable`, `Data.Monoid`, `Control.DeepSeq`, `Data.List`, and lots of others.
Just remove unneeded imports after importing `Universum` (GHC should tell you which ones).

Then, some commonly used types: `Map/HashMap/IntMap`, `Set/HashSet/IntSet`, `Seq`, `Text` and `ByteString`
(as well as synonyms `LText` and `LByteString` for lazy versions).

`liftIO` and `MonadIO` are exported by default. A lot of `IO` functions are generalized to `MonadIO`.

`deepseq` is exported. For instance, if you want to force deep evaluation of some value (in IO),
you can write `evaluateNF a`. WHNF evaluation is possible with `evaluateWHNF a`.

We also reexport big chunks of these libraries: `mtl`, `stm`, `microlens`, `microlens-mtl`.

[`Bifunctor`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.9.1.0/docs/Data-Bifunctor.html)
type class with useful instances is exported.

* `first` and `second` functions apply a function to first/second part of a tuple (for tuples).
* `bimap` takes two functions and applies them to first and second parts respectively.

### Text

We export `Text` and `LText`, and some functions work with `Text` instead of `String` –
specifically, IO functions (`readFile`, `putStrLn`, etc) and `show`. In fact, `show`
is polymorphic and can produce strict or lazy `Text`, `String`, or `ByteString`.
Also, `toText/toLText/toString` can convert `Text|LText|String` types to `Text/LText/String`. If you want to convert to and from `ByteString` use `encodeUtf8/decodeUtf8` functions.

### Debugging and `undefined`s

`trace`, `traceM`, `traceShow`, etc. are available by default. GHC will warn you
if you accidentally leave them in code, however (same for `undefined`).

We also have `data Undefined = Undefined` (which, too, comes with warnings).

### Exceptions

We use [`safe-exceptions`](https://github.com/fpco/safe-exceptions)
library for exceptions handling. Don't import `Control.Exceptions`
module explicitly. Instead use functionality from `safe-exceptions`
provided by `universum` or import `Control.Exceptions.Safe` module.

What's new? [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
-----------

Finally, we can move to part describing the new cool features we bring with `universum`.

* `uncons` splits a list at the first element.
* `ordNub` and `sortNub` are _O(n log n)_ versions of `nub` (which is quadratic)
  and `hashNub` and `unstableNub` are almost _O(n)_ versions of `nub`.
* `(&)` – reverse application. `x & f & g` instead of `g $ f $ x` is useful sometimes.
* `pretty` and `prettyL` for converting `Buildable` into `Text` (suggested be used instead of `show`).
* `whenM`, `unlessM`, `ifM`, `guardM` are available and do what you expect
  them to do (e.g. `whenM (doesFileExist "foo")`).
* Very generalized version of `concatMapM`, too, is available and does what expected.
* `readMaybe` and `readEither` are like `read` but total and give either
  `Maybe` or `Either` with parse error.
* `when(Just|Nothing|Left|Right|NotEmpty)[M][_]`
  let you conditionally execute something. Before:

  ```haskell
  case mbX of
      Nothing -> return ()
      Just x  -> ... x ...
  ```

  After:

  ```haskell
  whenJust mbX $ \x ->
      ... x ...
  ```

* `for_` for loops. There's also `forM_` but `for_` looks a bit nicer.

  ```haskell
  for_ [1..10] $ \i -> do
      ...
  ```

* `andM`, `allM`, `anyM`, `orM` are monadic version of corresponding functions from `base`.
* Type operator `$` for writing types like `Maybe $ Either String $ Maybe Int`.
* `Each` type family. So this:

  ```haskell
  f :: Each [Show, Read] [a, b] => a -> b -> String
  ```

  translates into this:

  ```haskell
  f :: (Show a, Show b, Read a, Read b) => a -> b -> String
  ```

* `With` type operator. So this:

  ```haskell
  a :: With [Show, Read] a => a -> a
  ```

  translates into this:

  ```haskell
  a :: (Show a, Read a) => a -> a
  ```

* Variadic composition operator `(...)`. So you can write:

  ```haskell
  ghci> (show ... (+)) 1 2
  "3"
  ghci> show ... 5
  "5"
  ghci> (null ... zip5) [1] [2] [3] [] [5]
  True
  ghci> let process = map (+3) ... filter
  ghci> process even [1..5]
  [5,7]
  ```

* Conversions between `Either` and `Maybe` like `rightToMaybe` and `maybeToLeft`
  with clear semantic.
* `using(Reader|State)[T]` functions as aliases for `flip run(Reader|State)[T]`.
* [`One` type class](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/master/src/Containers.hs#L473)
  for creating singleton containers. Even monomorhpic ones like `Text`.
* `evaluateWHNF` and `evaluateNF` functions as clearer and lifted aliases for
  `evaluate` and `evaluate . force`.
* `ToPairs` type class for data types that can be converted to list of pairs (like `Map` or `HashMap` or `IntMap`).

Migration guide from Prelude [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
----------------------------

In order to replace default `Prelude` with `universum` you should start with instructions given in
[how to use universum](https://github.com/serokell/universum#how-to-use-universum) section.

This section describes what you need to change to make your code compile with `universum`.

1. Enable `-XOverloadedStrings` and `-XTypeFamilies` extension by default for your project.
2. Since `head`, `tail`, `last` and `init` work for `NonEmpty` you should
   refactor your code in one of the multiple ways described below:
   1. Change `[a]` to `NonEmpty a` where it makes sense.
   2. Use functions which return `Maybe`. They can be implemented using `nonEmpty` function. Like `head <$> nonEmpty l`.
       + `head <$> nonEmpty l` is `safeHead l`
       + `tail` is `drop 1`. It's almost never a good idea to use `tail` from `Prelude`.
   3. Add `import qualified Universum.Unsafe as Unsafe` and replace function with qualified usage.
3. If you use `fromJust` or `!!` you should use them from `import qualified Universum.Unsafe as Unsafe`.
4. Derive or implement `Container` instances for your data types which implement
   `Foldable` instances. This can be done in a single line because `Container`
   type class automatically derives from `Foldable`.
5. `Container` type class from `universum` replaces `Foldable` and doesn't have
   instances for `Maybe a`, `(a, b)`, `Identity a` and `Either a b`. If you use
   `foldr` or `forM_` or similar for something like `Maybe a` you should replace
   usages of such function with monomorhpic alternatives:
   * `Maybe`
     + `(?:)          :: Maybe a -> a -> a`
     + `fromMaybe     :: a -> Maybe a -> a`
     + `maybeToList   :: Maybe a -> [a]`
     + `maybeToMonoid :: Monoid m => Maybe m -> m`
     + `maybe         :: b -> (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> b`
     + `whenJust      :: Applicative f => Maybe a -> (a -> f ()) -> f ()`
     + `whenJustM     :: Monad m => m (Maybe a) -> (a -> m ()) -> m ()`

   * `Either`
     + `fromLeft   :: a -> Either a b -> a`
     + `fromRight  :: b -> Either a b -> b`
     + `either     :: (a -> c) -> (b -> c) -> Either a b -> c`
     + `whenRight  :: Applicative f => Either l r -> (r -> f ()) -> f ()`
     + `whenRightM :: Monad m => m (Either l r) -> (r -> m ()) -> m ()`

6. If you have types like `foo :: Foldable f => f a -> a -> a` you should chose one of the following:
   + `Right`: Modify types for `Container` like `foo :: (Container t, Element t ~ a) => t -> a -> a`.
   + `Left`: Import `Data.Foldable` module `qualified` and use everything `Foldable`-related qualified.
7. Forget about `String` type.
   + Replace `putStr` and `putStrLn` with `putText` and `putTextLn`.
   + Replace `(++)` with `(<>)` for `String`-like types.
   + Try to use [`fmt`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/fmt) library if you need to construct messages.
   + Use `toText/toLText/toString` functions to convert to `Text/LazyText/String` types.
   + Use `encodeUtf8/decodeUtf8` to convert to/from `ByteString`.
8. Run `hlint` using `.hlint.yaml` file from `universum` package to cleanup code and imports.

Projects that use Universum [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
---------------------------

- [cardano-report-server](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-report-server)
- [cardano-sl](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl)
- [importify](https://github.com/serokell/importify)
- [log-warper](https://github.com/serokell/log-warper)
- [orgstat](https://github.com/volhovm/orgstat)

Commit message:

[#135] Add documentation about internal module structure

README.md, after:

Universum
=========

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/serokell/universum.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/serokell/universum)
[![Windows build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/github/serokell/universum?branch=master&svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/ChShersh/universum)
[![Hackage](https://img.shields.io/hackage/v/universum.svg)](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/universum)
[![Stackage LTS](http://stackage.org/package/universum/badge/lts)](http://stackage.org/lts/package/universum)
[![Stackage Nightly](http://stackage.org/package/universum/badge/nightly)](http://stackage.org/nightly/package/universum)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

`universum` is a custom prelude used in @Serokell that has:

1. **Excellent documentation**: tutorial, migration guide from `Prelude`,
   Haddock with examples for (almost) every function,
   all examples are tested with [`doctest`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/doctest),
   documenation regarding internal module structure.
2. `universum`-specific [HLint](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/hlint) rules:
   [`.hlint.yaml`](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/master/.hlint.yaml)
3. Very few LiquidHaskell properties. At least LiquidHaskell is on Travis CI and
   other properties just waiting to be added!
4. Focus on safety, convenience and efficiency.

What is this file about?
------------------------

This README contains introduction to `Universum` and a tutorial on how to use it.

Structure of this tutorial
--------------------------

This tutorial has several parts:

1. [Philosophy and motivation.](#why-another-custom-prelude-)
2. [How to use `universum`.](#how-to-use-universum-)
3. [Changes in `Prelude` (some gotchas).](#gotchas-)
4. [Already known things that weren't in `Prelude` brought into scope.](#things-that-you-were-already-using-but-now-you-dont-have-to-import-them-explicitly-)
5. [New things added.](#whats-new-)
6. [Migration guide from `Prelude`.](#migration-guide-from-prelude-)

This is not a tutorial on _Haskell_, and not even a tutorial on each function. For the detailed
documentation of every function with examples and usages see
[_Haddock documentation_](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/universum).

Why another custom Prelude? [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
---------------------------

### Motivation

In [Serokell](https://github.com/serokell/),  we want to be as much productive as possible.
That's why we are using [_Haskell_](https://haskell-lang.org/). This choice of language implies
that we're restricted to use [`Prelude`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.9.1.0/docs/Prelude.html):
implicit import of basic functions, type classes and data types. But the default `Prelude`
[is considered to be not so good](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=8002749)
due to some historical reasons.

This is why we decided to use a better tool. Hopefully _Haskell_ provides us with ability
to replace default `Prelude` with some alternative. All we need to do is to implement
new basic set of defaults. But we don't intend to implement everything from scratch.
There're already plenty of [preludes](https://guide.aelve.com/haskell/alternative-preludes-zr69k1hc).
After some hot long discussions our team decided to base our custom prelude on
[`protolude`](https://github.com/sdiehl/protolude). If you're not familiar with it,
you can read [a tutorial about `protolude`](http://www.stephendiehl.com/posts/protolude.html).

The next section explains why we have made this choice and what we are willing to do.
This tutorial doesn't cover the differences from `protolude`. Instead, it explains how Universum is different from custom `Prelude`.

### Main goals

While creating and maintaining a custom prelude, we are pursuing the following goals:

1. Avoid all [partial functions](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/5n51u3/why_are_partial_functions_as_in_head_tail_bad/).
   We like [total](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/TotalFunction.html) and exception-free functions.
   Though you can still use some unsafe functions from `Universum.Unsafe` module
   but they are not exported by default.
2. Use more efficient [string representations](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/29jw0s/whats_wrong_with_string/).
   `String` type is crushingly inefficient. All our functions either try to be polymorphic over string
   types, or use [`Text`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/text-1.2.2.1/docs/Data-Text.html)
   as the default string type. `String` type alias is still reexported, because the community
   is evolving slowly, some libraries still use `String` type. But we recommend to avoid `String`!
3. Don't reinvent the wheel. We're not trying to rebuild whole type hierarchy from scratch,
   as it's done in [`classy-prelude`](https://github.com/snoyberg/mono-traversable).
   Instead, we reexport common and well-known things from `base` and some other
   libraries used in everyday production programming in _Haskell_.
   > **Note**: well, we did end up inventing something new.
4. Export more useful and commonly used functions. [Hello, my name is Dmitry. I was
   coding _Haskell_ for 3 years but still hoogling which module `liftIO` comes from.](https://twitter.com/magnars/status/834683466130345984)
   Things like `liftIO`, `ReaderT` type, `MVar`-related functions have unambiguous names,
   are used in almost every non-trivial project, and it's really tedious to import them
   manually every time.

Unlike `protolude`, we are:

1. Not trying to be as general as possible (thus we don't export much from
   [`GHC.Generics`](https://github.com/sdiehl/protolude/blob/41710698eedc66fb0bfc5623d3c3a672421fbab5/src/Protolude.hs#L365)).
2. Not trying to maintain every version of `ghc` compiler (only the
   [latest 3](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/b6353285859e9ed3544bddbf55d70237330ad64a/.travis.yml#L15)
3. Trying to make writing production code easier (see
   [enhancements and fixes](https://github.com/serokell/universum/issues)).

How to use Universum [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
--------------------

Okay, enough philosophy. If you want to just start using `universum` and
explore it with the help of compiler, set everything up according to the instructions below.

Disable the built-in prelude at the top of your file:

```haskell
{-# LANGUAGE NoImplicitPrelude #-}
```

Or directly in your project `.cabal` file, if you want to use in every module by default:

```haskell
default-extensions: NoImplicitPrelude
```

Then add the following import to your modules:

```haskell
import Universum
```

If you're using [Emacs](https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/), you can
[modify your configs](https://github.com/serokell/universum/issues/8#issuecomment-276444879)
a little bit if you don't want to type `import Universum` manually every time.

If you want to get familiar with `universum` internal structure you can just
read top-level documentation for
[`Universum`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/universum/docs/Universum.html)
module.

Gotchas [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
-------

* `head`, `tail`, `last`, `init` work with `NonEmpty a` instead of `[a]`.
* Safe analogue for `head` function: `safeHead :: [a] -> Maybe a`.
* `undefined` triggers a compiler warning, which is probably not what you want. Either use `throwIO`, `Except`, `error` or `bug`.
* `map` is `fmap` now.
* Multiple sorting functions are available without imports:
  + `sortBy :: (a -> a -> Ordering) -> [a] -> [a]`: sorts list using given custom comparator.
  + `sortWith :: Ord b => (a -> b) -> [a] -> [a]`: sorts a list based on some property of its elements.
  + `sortOn :: Ord b => (a -> b) -> [a] -> [a]`: just like `sortWith`, but more time-efficient if function is calculated slowly (though less space-efficient). So you should write `sortOn length` (would sort elements by length) but `sortWith fst` (would sort list of pairs by first element).
* Functions `sum` and `product` are strict now, which makes them more efficient.
* If you try to do something like `putStrLn "hi"`, you'll get an error message if
  `OverloadedStrings` is enabled – it happens because the compiler doesn't know what
  type to infer for the string. Use `putTextLn` in this case.
* Since `show` doesn't come from `Show` anymore, you can't write `Show` instances easily.
  Either use autoderived instances or
  [`Buildable`](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/f2ccf8afd862e37ccd204c0ef9efde48a05c2d29/src/Universum.hs#L144).
* You can't call some `Foldable` methods over `Maybe` and some other types.
  `Foldable` generalization is useful but
  [potentially error-prone](https://www.reddit.com/r/haskell/comments/60r9hu/proposal_suggest_explicit_type_application_for/).
  Instead we created our own fully compatible with `Foldable`
  [`Container` type class](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/b6353285859e9ed3544bddbf55d70237330ad64a/src/Universum/Container/Class.hs#L180)
  but that restricts the usage of functions like `length` over `Maybe`, `Either`, `Identity` and tuples.
  We're also using _GHC 8_ feature of
  [custom compile-time errors](https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/latest/docs/html/users_guide/glasgow_exts.html#custom-compile-time-errors)
  to produce
  [more helpful messages](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/54a742c10720f11c739f2d268365d723924b83a9/src/Containers.hs#L474).
* As a consequence of previous point, some functions like `traverse_`, `forM_`, `sequenceA_`, etc.
  are generalized over `Container` type classes.
* `error` takes `Text`.


Things that you were already using, but now you don't have to import them explicitly [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Commonly used libraries

First of all, we reexport some generally useful modules: `Control.Applicative`,
`Data.Traversable`, `Data.Monoid`, `Control.DeepSeq`, `Data.List`, and lots of others.
Just remove unneeded imports after importing `Universum` (GHC should tell you which ones).

Then, some commonly used types: `Map/HashMap/IntMap`, `Set/HashSet/IntSet`, `Seq`, `Text` and `ByteString`
(as well as synonyms `LText` and `LByteString` for lazy versions).

`liftIO` and `MonadIO` are exported by default. A lot of `IO` functions are generalized to `MonadIO`.

`deepseq` is exported. For instance, if you want to force deep evaluation of some value (in IO),
you can write `evaluateNF a`. WHNF evaluation is possible with `evaluateWHNF a`.

We also reexport big chunks of these libraries: `mtl`, `stm`, `microlens`, `microlens-mtl`.

[`Bifunctor`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/base-4.9.1.0/docs/Data-Bifunctor.html)
type class with useful instances is exported.

* `first` and `second` functions apply a function to first/second part of a tuple (for tuples).
* `bimap` takes two functions and applies them to first and second parts respectively.

### Text

We export `Text` and `LText`, and some functions work with `Text` instead of `String` –
specifically, IO functions (`readFile`, `putStrLn`, etc) and `show`. In fact, `show`
is polymorphic and can produce strict or lazy `Text`, `String`, or `ByteString`.
Also, `toText/toLText/toString` can convert `Text|LText|String` types to `Text/LText/String`. If you want to convert to and from `ByteString` use `encodeUtf8/decodeUtf8` functions.

### Debugging and `undefined`s

`trace`, `traceM`, `traceShow`, etc. are available by default. GHC will warn you
if you accidentally leave them in code, however (same for `undefined`).

We also have `data Undefined = Undefined` (which, too, comes with warnings).

### Exceptions

We use [`safe-exceptions`](https://github.com/fpco/safe-exceptions)
library for exceptions handling. Don't import `Control.Exceptions`
module explicitly. Instead use functionality from `safe-exceptions`
provided by `universum` or import `Control.Exceptions.Safe` module.

What's new? [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
-----------

Finally, we can move to part describing the new cool features we bring with `universum`.

* `uncons` splits a list at the first element.
* `ordNub` and `sortNub` are _O(n log n)_ versions of `nub` (which is quadratic)
  and `hashNub` and `unstableNub` are almost _O(n)_ versions of `nub`.
* `(&)` – reverse application. `x & f & g` instead of `g $ f $ x` is useful sometimes.
* `pretty` and `prettyL` for converting `Buildable` into `Text` (suggested be used instead of `show`).
* `whenM`, `unlessM`, `ifM`, `guardM` are available and do what you expect
  them to do (e.g. `whenM (doesFileExist "foo")`).
* Very generalized version of `concatMapM`, too, is available and does what expected.
* `readMaybe` and `readEither` are like `read` but total and give either
  `Maybe` or `Either` with parse error.
* `when(Just|Nothing|Left|Right|NotEmpty)[M][_]`
  let you conditionally execute something. Before:

  ```haskell
  case mbX of
      Nothing -> return ()
      Just x  -> ... x ...
  ```

  After:

  ```haskell
  whenJust mbX $ \x ->
      ... x ...
  ```

* `for_` for loops. There's also `forM_` but `for_` looks a bit nicer.

  ```haskell
  for_ [1..10] $ \i -> do
      ...
  ```

* `andM`, `allM`, `anyM`, `orM` are monadic version of corresponding functions from `base`.
* Type operator `$` for writing types like `Maybe $ Either String $ Maybe Int`.
* `Each` type family. So this:

  ```haskell
  f :: Each [Show, Read] [a, b] => a -> b -> String
  ```

  translates into this:

  ```haskell
  f :: (Show a, Show b, Read a, Read b) => a -> b -> String
  ```

* `With` type operator. So this:

  ```haskell
  a :: With [Show, Read] a => a -> a
  ```

  translates into this:

  ```haskell
  a :: (Show a, Read a) => a -> a
  ```

* Variadic composition operator `(...)`. So you can write:

  ```haskell
  ghci> (show ... (+)) 1 2
  "3"
  ghci> show ... 5
  "5"
  ghci> (null ... zip5) [1] [2] [3] [] [5]
  True
  ghci> let process = map (+3) ... filter
  ghci> process even [1..5]
  [5,7]
  ```

* Conversions between `Either` and `Maybe` like `rightToMaybe` and `maybeToLeft`
  with clear semantic.
* `using(Reader|State)[T]` functions as aliases for `flip run(Reader|State)[T]`.
* [`One` type class](https://github.com/serokell/universum/blob/master/src/Containers.hs#L473)
  for creating singleton containers. Even monomorhpic ones like `Text`.
* `evaluateWHNF` and `evaluateNF` functions as clearer and lifted aliases for
  `evaluate` and `evaluate . force`.
* `ToPairs` type class for data types that can be converted to list of pairs (like `Map` or `HashMap` or `IntMap`).

Migration guide from Prelude [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
----------------------------

In order to replace default `Prelude` with `universum` you should start with instructions given in
[how to use universum](https://github.com/serokell/universum#how-to-use-universum-) section.

This section describes what you need to change to make your code compile with `universum`.

1. Enable `-XOverloadedStrings` and `-XTypeFamilies` extension by default for your project.
2. Since `head`, `tail`, `last` and `init` work for `NonEmpty` you should
   refactor your code in one of the multiple ways described below:
   1. Change `[a]` to `NonEmpty a` where it makes sense.
   2. Use functions which return `Maybe`. They can be implemented using `nonEmpty` function. Like `head <$> nonEmpty l`.
       + `head <$> nonEmpty l` is `safeHead l`
       + `tail` is `drop 1`. It's almost never a good idea to use `tail` from `Prelude`.
   3. Add `import qualified Universum.Unsafe as Unsafe` and replace function with qualified usage.
3. If you use `fromJust` or `!!` you should use them from `import qualified Universum.Unsafe as Unsafe`.
4. Derive or implement `Container` instances for your data types which implement
   `Foldable` instances. This can be done in a single line because `Container`
   type class automatically derives from `Foldable`.
5. `Container` type class from `universum` replaces `Foldable` and doesn't have
   instances for `Maybe a`, `(a, b)`, `Identity a` and `Either a b`. If you use
   `foldr` or `forM_` or similar for something like `Maybe a` you should replace
   usages of such function with monomorhpic alternatives:
   * `Maybe`
     + `(?:)          :: Maybe a -> a -> a`
     + `fromMaybe     :: a -> Maybe a -> a`
     + `maybeToList   :: Maybe a -> [a]`
     + `maybeToMonoid :: Monoid m => Maybe m -> m`
     + `maybe         :: b -> (a -> b) -> Maybe a -> b`
     + `whenJust      :: Applicative f => Maybe a -> (a -> f ()) -> f ()`
     + `whenJustM     :: Monad m => m (Maybe a) -> (a -> m ()) -> m ()`

   * `Either`
     + `fromLeft   :: a -> Either a b -> a`
     + `fromRight  :: b -> Either a b -> b`
     + `either     :: (a -> c) -> (b -> c) -> Either a b -> c`
     + `whenRight  :: Applicative f => Either l r -> (r -> f ()) -> f ()`
     + `whenRightM :: Monad m => m (Either l r) -> (r -> m ()) -> m ()`

6. If you have types like `foo :: Foldable f => f a -> a -> a` you should chose one of the following:
   + `Right`: Modify types for `Container` like `foo :: (Container t, Element t ~ a) => t -> a -> a`.
   + `Left`: Import `Data.Foldable` module `qualified` and use everything `Foldable`-related qualified.
7. Forget about `String` type.
   + Replace `putStr` and `putStrLn` with `putText` and `putTextLn`.
   + Replace `(++)` with `(<>)` for `String`-like types.
   + Try to use [`fmt`](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/fmt) library if you need to construct messages.
   + Use `toText/toLText/toString` functions to convert to `Text/LazyText/String` types.
   + Use `encodeUtf8/decodeUtf8` to convert to/from `ByteString`.
8. Run `hlint` using `.hlint.yaml` file from `universum` package to cleanup code and imports.

Projects that use Universum [↑](#structure-of-this-tutorial)
---------------------------

- [cardano-report-server](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-report-server)
- [cardano-sl](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl)
- [importify](https://github.com/serokell/importify)
- [log-warper](https://github.com/serokell/log-warper)
- [orgstat](https://github.com/volhovm/orgstat)
